Weekly PowerPoint Presentations as a Way to Develop Project
Management Skills

Lev Selector

Published on November 5, 2019

Leaders vs workers.

Leaders can easily see structure in things. They can see the big
picture – and how it translates into strategy and into tactical
solutions. They can make diagrams, make step-by step plans,
divide responsibilities between team members for parallel
execution, define vision, long-term and shot-term goals, set
priorities.

Workers – valuable team members who unfortunately can not do
what leaders do. They have difficulties figuring out the
dependencies and the order of the steps. These people need to be
told exactly what to do, step by step.

Of course this classification into leaders and workers is not
absolute. A leader does not necessarily has a managerial
position. And vice versa, a manager may be a “worker” (not a
good situation for the team).

Question: Is there a way to train “workers” to see structure? To
become better at managing their projects?

The answer is “YES”.

One of the methods I have found to be effective is to schedule
weekly 5-10 min PowerPoint presentations where each team member
explains his or her project, task, and status.

For example, suppose a person's project is to create a website
using standard MVC architecture (Model-View-Controller). The
PowerPoint presentation may cover the following:

SLIDE 1 - Name of the project, functional description; 
          benefits if success, losses if failure.
SLIDE 2 - Model – database schema (tables and relationships)
SLIDE 3 - View - diagram of web pages and state-transition
          diagrams
SLIDE 4 - Controller - diagram of business logic
SLIDE 5 - Step-by-step plan of implementation, what is done,
          what needs to be done
SLIDE 6 - Estimated time to completion, potential problems and
          delays, planned vs actual costs (time, resources, money)

Nowadays it is common to make regular scrum meetings where each
team member gives short summary of the status of his/her task.
This helps to keep track of existing tasks, but doesn’t help
“workers” to understand the vision, strategy, steps, etc.

So in addition to scrum meetings I highly recommend to start
doing weekly PowerPoint presentations by each “worker”. These
presentations have many benefits:

 - understanding of the big picture and role of specific 
   tasks in it 
 - understanding of relationships between different pieces
   of the project
 - increasing effectiveness of work
 - increasing collaboration between team members
 - increasing self-confidence, improving public speaking 
   skills
 - improving job satisfaction

Conclusion - I highly recommend the weekly PPT presentations.