Clickable Dummy for a Software Project Architecture and Delivery

Published on November 5, 2019

Lev Selector, Ph.D.

Twenty years ago I had a privilege to listen to Jesse Erlbaum:

  - http://www.erlbaum.net/jesse_erlbaum/

The title of his talk was something like “How to Deliver
Software Projects on Time and on Budget”. 

The main takeaway for me was the idea of importance of using a
“Clickable Dummy” prototype of the application. It is not just
documenting the desired functionality. You need to actually sit
down with the end-user and develop a live prototype. 

What is a “dummy” prototype? It is a very simple application
which goes through the steps and just gives you print
statements. It is a skeleton, a baby.

For example, for an ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) it is a
sequence of procedures to run. The procedures don’t do any
actual work – they are just simple placeholders with print
statements.

For a web application, it is a set of static web pages with
short descriptions on them and links to go from one page to
another.

Etc. 

Once you have this “dummy” application developed and agreed
upon, only then you can create project docs, estimates of time
and resources needed.

The phase of developing a “dummy” app is very important. And it
usually takes 25-50% of overall time and cost of the project.

Yes, up to 50%.

So, before you sign papers with the client, you need to agree on
a two-phase approach.

 - 1st phase - preparing specifications and estimate
 - 2nd phase - actually implementing

Notes about the 1st phase:
 - specifications are prepared involving end-users (and developers)
 - 1st phase constitutes ~25 ..50% of total development costs
 - 1st phase allows to give a time/money estimate (don't
   overpromise and don't take unnecessary responsibilities)

For a typical web-based application, the specifications would
include:
 - UI Screens (just buttons, form fields and links - may be 
   HTML-templates)
 - Data model
 - State Transition Diagrams (1 state per screen for a web-app)
   or wireframes
 - Textual description
 - Revised Estimate and schedule
 