Self-Serve Analytics

Lev Selector, Ph.D.

Published October 17, 2019

Should analytics team build analytics dashboards and reports for
all departments? Or should departments do most of their
analytics themselves?

In my opinion you should encourage and enable “self-serve
analytics” as much as possible. And here is why.

Note, that this is not a new problem. Almost 50 years ago (in
1971) IBM has introduced SQL (Structured Query Language) with
the goal to give business people access to data. 

The SQL was designed to be very simple - so that non-technical
people can use it.

Since then SQL has become a standard. There are multiple SQL
databases to choose from. Many of them are optimized for fast
queries for analytics.

Also nowadays business people are very good with computers. They
use Microsoft Excel to do their own analysis, graphs,
dashboards. So it is very natural for them to start using some
Business Intelligence tools (like Microsoft Power BI, Tableau,
etc., or even Jupyter Lab and Jupyter Dashboards). These tools
can use SQL to get data from databases.

The mistake some companies make is to have analytics team to do
all analytics work for all business units. Why is it wrong?
Because instead of enabling business people to do the work
themselves (walk by themselves), the analytics team is doing the
work for them (moving business people’ feet).

This takes a big analytics team. It creates lots of emails,
meetings, tickets, lots of unnecessary friction. The development
and maintenance becomes slow and expensive, the whole
organizational structure becomes very ineffective.

Also note that if you are building an analytics team, there are
multiple targets. I would highlight the following four:
  1. do strategic and ad-hoc analysis and predictive analytics for
     higher management
  2. provide tools, training, and support for all departments to
     have access to data, and to do their own “self-serve analytics”
  3. build company-wide and department-specific analytics
     (reports, dashboards)
  4. enable usage of Machine Learning and AI tools (optimization
     via predictive analytics, automated data collection/extraction,
     automated chatbots, etc., etc.)

By leveraging other departments to do their own analytics (p.2), 
you will free up your resources to concentrate on pp.1,3,4
